www.NASA.gov

NASA and its international partners approved crew members for Axiom Space’s first private astronaut mission to the International Space Station. The flight, called Axiom Mission 1 or Ax-1, is targeted to launch Wednesday, March 30, from Launch Complex 39A at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida on a flight-proven SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket. The Ax-1 crew will fly on Crew Dragon Endeavour to and from the space station. After 10 days in orbit, the Ax-1 crew will splash down off the coast of Florida.
Axiom Space astronauts Michael López-Alegría, Larry Connor, Mark Pathy, and Eytan Stibbe are prime crew members of the Ax-1 mission. López-Alegría, who was born in Spain, raised in California, and a former NASA astronaut, will serve as the mission commander. Connor, of Dayton, Ohio, will serve as pilot. Pathy, from Canada, and Stibbe, from Israel, will be mission specialists. The quartet is scheduled to spend eight days aboard the orbiting laboratory conducting science, education, and commercial activities before their return to Earth.
“This represents another significant milestone in our efforts to create a low-Earth orbit economy,” said Phil McAlister, director of commercial spaceflight at NASA. “I wish these Axiom crew members safe travels, and I hope they find their time in space productive and enjoyable.”
Proposed mission activities are still under review and will be approved prior to flight. Axiom previously revealed a microgravity research portfolio the Ax-1 crew intends to undertake in orbit in partnership with a variety of organizations on Earth. This research is sponsored by the ISS U.S. National Laboratory.
“The goal for the Ax-1 crew is to set a standard for all future private astronaut missions in terms of our preparation and professionalism,” López-Alegría said. “As the commander, I am proud of the work these crew members have put in to be ready to conduct meaningful work on the International Space Station and glad to see them meet the standards required of all astronauts flying to station since Expedition 1. Ax-1 is focused on a huge amount of science and outreach activities, and we look forward now to finalizing that flight program.”
The Ax-1 crew has been training at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston and other NASA facilities since August 2021 to familiarize themselves with station systems, scientific facilities, and emergency procedures. The crew also has been training with NASA’s space station international partners at ESA (European Space Agency), as well as with launch contractor SpaceX at its facilities in Hawthorne, California, and at other locations in preparation for the mission.
NASA and Axiom mission operations teams began joint simulations in December for familiarization with the dynamic phases of the private astronauts’ flight to and from the space station. Joint simulations will continue in preparation for launch.
NASA continues to make rapid progress in its efforts to build a robust low-Earth orbit economy. The agency recently announced its selection of Axiom Space to begin negotiations for the second private astronaut mission. NASA also recently announced its selection of companies to develop designs of space stations and other commercial destinations in low-Earth orbit.
Prior to these new awards, NASA selected Axiom Space in January 2020 to design and develop commercial modules to attach to the station. Axiom recently completed the preliminary design review of two modules as well as the critical design review of the modules’ primary structure with NASA participation. Flight hardware for the first Axiom module is currently undergoing fabrication.
For more than 21 years, NASA has supported a continuous U.S. human presence in low-Earth orbit aboard the space station. The agency's goal is to enable a strong, commercial marketplace in low-Earth orbit with private industry where NASA is one of many customers. This strategy will provide services the government needs at a lower cost, enabling the agency to focus on its Artemis missions to the Moon in preparation for Mars while continuing to use low-Earth orbit as a training and proving ground for those deep space missions.
In just minutes, a flare on the Sun can release enough energy to power the whole world for 20,000 years. An explosive process called magnetic reconnection triggers these solar flares and scientists have spent the last half-century trying to understand how the process happens.
It’s not just a scientific curiosity: A fuller understanding of magnetic reconnection could enable insights into nuclear fusion and provide better predictions of particle storms from the Sun that can affect Earth-orbiting technology.
Now, scientists with NASA’s Magnetospheric Multiscale Mission, or MMS, think they’ve figured it out. The scientists have developed a theory that explains how the most explosive type of magnetic reconnection – called fast reconnection – occurs and why it happens at a consistent speed. The new theory uses a common magnetic effect that’s used in household devices, such as sensors that time vehicle anti-lock braking systems and know when a cell phone flip cover is closed.
“We finally understand what makes this type of magnetic reconnection so fast,” said lead author on the new study Yi-Hsin Liu, a physics professor at Dartmouth College in New Hampshire and the deputy-lead of MMS’ theory and modeling team. “We now have a theory to explain it fully.”
Magnetic reconnection is a process that occurs in plasma, sometimes called the fourth state of matter. Plasma forms when a gas has been energized enough to break apart its atoms, leaving a motley of negatively charged electrons and positively charged ions existing side-by-side. This energetic, fluid-like material is exquisitely sensitive to magnetic fields.
From flares on the Sun, to near-Earth space, to black holes, plasmas throughout the universe undergo magnetic reconnection, which rapidly converts magnetic energy into heat and acceleration. While there are several types of magnetic reconnection, one particularly puzzling variant is known as fast reconnection, which occurs at a predictable rate.
“We have known for a while that fast reconnection happens at a certain rate that seems to be pretty constant,” said Barbara Giles, project scientist for MMS and research scientist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. “But what really drives that rate has been a mystery, until now.”
The new research, published in a paper in Nature’s Communications Physics journal and funded in part by the National Science Foundation, explains how fast reconnection occurs specifically in collisionless plasmas – a type of plasma whose particles are spread out enough that the individual particles don’t collide with one another. Where reconnection happens in space, most plasma is in this collisionless state, including the plasma in solar flares and the space around Earth.
The new theory shows how and why fast reconnection is likely sped up by the Hall effect, which describes the interaction between magnetic fields and electric currents. The Hall effect is a common magnetic phenomenon that’s used in everyday technology, like vehicle wheel speed sensors and 3D printers, where sensors measure speed, proximity, positioning, or electrical currents.
During fast magnetic reconnection, charged particles in a plasma – namely ions and electrons – stop moving as a group. As the ions and electrons begin moving separately, they give rise to the Hall effect, creating an unstable energy vacuum where reconnection happens. Pressure from the magnetic fields around the energy vacuum causes the vacuum to implode, which quickly releases immense amounts of energy at a predictable rate.
This visualization shows the Hall effect, which occurs when the motion of the heavier ions (blue) decouple from the lighter electrons (red) as they enter the region with strong electric currents (golden region).
This visualization shows the Hall effect, which occurs when the motion of the heavier ions (blue) decouple from the lighter electrons (red) as they enter the region with strong electric currents (golden region).
Credits: Tom Bridgman/NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio
The new theory will be tested in the coming years with MMS, which uses four spacecraft flown around Earth in a pyramid formation to study magnetic reconnection in collisionless plasmas. In this unique space laboratory, MMS can study magnetic reconnection at a higher resolution than would be possible on Earth.
“Ultimately, if we can understand how magnetic reconnection operates, then we can better predict events that can impact us at Earth, like geomagnetic storms and solar flares,” Giles said. “And if we can understand how reconnection is initiated, it will also help energy research because researchers could better control magnetic fields in fusion devices.”
Related Links
New research confirms how particles from space can be sent careening down into Earth’s atmosphere to create the aurora, filling in a missing piece in how this stunning natural phenomenon is generated. The findings were presented on June 7, 2021, at the 238th meeting of the American Astronomical Society and published in the journal Nature Communications.
For the first time, scientists directly observed how electrons can “surf” a type of plasma wave and gain the energy required to spark aurora in Earth’s atmosphere. Partly funded by NASA, the research team set out to study how electrons can be accelerated by waves in plasma — the thin, ionized gas that fills space. Earlier measurements from satellites — including NASA’s Magnetospheric Multiscale mission and two since-retired missions, Polar and FAST — suggested that a certain type of plasma wave called an Alfvén wave could be responsible for energizing electrons that rain down into Earth’s atmosphere and cause aurora. The scientists used the Large Plasma Device at the University of California, Los Angeles to create an Alfvén wave in a controlled plasma environment, allowing them to study precisely how electrons are affected by such waves in detail.
As NASA continues to explore near-Earth space, these results will improve models of the physics in this region and help scientists better target space instruments to study such processes.   
Few were in the path of the world’s latest total solar eclipse, which swept across Antarctica in the early morning hours of Dec. 4. With or without a crowd, the eclipse took place according to a tale as old as time: The Moon passed between the Sun and Earth, casting its shadow and briefly revealing the corona, the Sun’s pearly outer atmosphere.
A week in advance, data from NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory, or SDO, enabled a group of researchers from Predictive Science Inc. to predict what the eclipse would look like from the ground. Although they would not view it themselves, the eclipse offered the researchers an opportunity to make and test complex predictions of the corona, which sends superhot gases gusting through the solar system.
handlebeforeafter
Show only LeftShow only Right
Predictive Science Inc. used a model to simulate the corona’s appearance during the Dec. 4, 2021, total solar eclipse. Click and drag the slider to compare the model’s predictions (left) to a composite photo of the eclipse from Union Glacier, Antarctica (right).
Credits: Left: Predictive Science Inc.; right: Jay M. Pasachoff (Williams College) Antarctic Eclipse Expedition; Land team: Theo Boris, Christian A. Lockwood; composite by Zev Hoover (MARS Scientific)
This constant flow shapes the dynamic space conditions known as space weather. Modeling the corona is a key part of better understanding and eventually predicting space weather, which affects satellites, astronauts, and everyday technology like radio and GPS.
An expedition led by Williams College astronomer Jay Pasachoff took the eclipse images from Union Glacier, Antarctica. (According to the expedition, the temperature was approximately 5 degrees Fahrenheit on the ice; during totality, it dropped to minus 4 degrees.)
Three figures wearing parkas work with photography equipment in Antarctica. A snow-covered mountain rises in the background. 
From left to right, eclipse expedition members Theo Boris, David Zimmermann, Christian Lockwood, and Peter Boris prepare eclipse-viewing equipment.
Credits: Janet Boris
By comparing the eclipse prediction to the eclipse photographs from the ground, as well as other spectroscopy data, the researchers can interpret the observations and assess their models. If there are discrepancies, these may indicate where researchers should focus on improving the theory and methods that comprise their model.
Solar activity is not constant; it ebbs and flows over a natural 11-year cycle. Currently, the Sun is growing increasingly active, so its magnetic field is changing rapidly. Indeed, during totality, a solar eruption known as a coronal mass ejection was visible in the Sun’s outer atmosphere.
“That makes predicting the corona especially challenging,” said Predictive Science researcher Cooper Downs. “The corona’s appearance can change a lot in a matter of days.” This was apparent in the differences between the two predictions, made two weeks apart.
Predictive Science Inc. – a private computational physics research company based in San Diego, California, and supported by NASA, the National Science Foundation and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research – used data from NASA's SDO, New Mexico State University, and the National Solar Observatory to develop their prediction. The group primarily ran the model on the Pleiades supercomputer at NASA’s Advanced Supercomputing division at the agency’s Ames Research Center in Silicon Valley, California.
“Overall, I’m quite happy with the comparison,” Downs said. “A lot of structures are still in the right place.”
s Orbital Flight Test-2
NASA and Boeing will hold a joint media teleconference at noon EDT on Tuesday, May 3, to discuss the agency’s Boeing Orbital Flight Test (OFT-2) mission and provide an update on spacecraft readiness. The teleconference includes the following participants: Kathryn Lueders, associate administrator, Space Operations Mission Directorate, NASA Headquarters Steve Stich, Read full postPosted May 2, 2022 at 7:45 pm on NASA's Boeing Orbital Flight Test 2 (OFT-2)
NASA’s Psyche Spacecraft Arrives at Kennedy
The Psyche spacecraft completed its journey from NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Southern California to NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida. First, it traveled to March Air Reserve Base, about 55 miles southeast of JPL, before flying cross-country aboard a C-17 aircraft to the Launch and Landing Facility (formerly Read full postPosted May 2, 2022 at 1:36 pm on Psyche Mission
Station Crew Changes Command on Tuesday Ahead of Departure
Four astronauts who have been aboard the International Space Station since November continue to prepare for their return to Earth. This comes at the same time as four new astronauts are beginning their mission and getting used to living and working aboard the orbiting lab. Expedition 67 Commander Tom Marshburn is Read full postPosted May 2, 2022 at 1:24 pm on Space Station
NASA’s Gregory Robinson Named Finalist for Service to America Medal
On May 1, the nonprofit, nonpartisan Partnership for Public Service announced the 2022 finalists for the Samuel J. Heyman Service to America Medal (Sammies) – an  awards program honoring excellence and innovation in federal service. Among the finalists is Gregory L. Robinson, program director for the James Webb Space Telescope Read full postPosted May 2, 2022 at 8:01 am on James Webb Space Telescope
Strong Solar Flare Erupts from Sun
The Sun emitted a strong solar flare on April 30, 2022, peaking at 9:47 a.m. EDT. NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory, which watches the Sun constantly, captured an image of the event. Solar flares are powerful bursts of energy. Flares and solar eruptions can impact radio communications, electric power grids, navigation signals, Read full postPosted May 2, 2022 at 7:43 am on Solar Cycle 25
The Hot and Cold of Webb
Completion of NASA’s James Webb Space Telescope’s optical alignment has moved us into the final phase of commissioning the Science Instruments. During this final phase the Webb team and instrument scientists will test all the modes and operations for the four science instruments to measure their performance, calibration, and overall Read full postPosted Apr 29, 2022 at 4:33 pm on James Webb Space Telescope
ISS Daily Summary Report – 4/29/2022
Payloads: AstroPi/Calliope: The crew transferred the AstroPi Infrared (IR) with attached Calliope Mini to the Columbus module, removed the Calliope hardware, and then transferred AstroPi Visible (Vis) to Node 2. The crew then performed a lens adjustment on AstroPi Vis. Two augmented Raspberry Pi computers (called AstroPis) were flown to the Read full postPosted Apr 29, 2022 at 4:00 pm on ISS On-Orbit Status Report
Community College Month: Jessica Bardetsky’s Path to NASA
At NASA, our workforce is made up of people who have pursued higher education in countless different fields – but that doesn’t always mean attending a 4-year university right after high school. In fact, many people in the NASA family (astronauts included!) have taken a non-traditional path to their education. In Read full postPosted Apr 29, 2022 at 2:05 pm on Interstellar Experiences of NASA Interns
Expedition 67 Crew Wraps Up Week After Crew Arrival and Spacewalk
Two Roscosmos cosmonauts went on a spacewalk to activate the new European robotic arm (ERA) less than a day after the SpaceX Crew-4 mission arrived at the International Space Station. The next mission event taking place will occur next week when four Expedition 67 astronauts complete their stay aboard the Read full postPosted Apr 29, 2022 at 1:09 pm on Space Station
Amazing Achievements From Parker Solar Probe
In 2018, NASA launched Parker Solar Probe on an unprecedented mission to study the Sun up close. The mission was defined with three key scientific goals: To trace the flow of energy that heats the Sun’s outer atmosphere. To shed light on the sources of the solar wind, the Read full post
